{\rtf1\ansi\uc1\deff0\deflang1024
{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}
{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}
{\f2\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}
{\f3\fnil\fcharset0 Courier New;}
{\f4\fnil\fcharset0 Zapf Chancery;}
{\f5\fnil\fcharset0 STIXGeneral;}
{\f6\fnil\fcharset0 MS Gothic;}
}
{\colortbl;
\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;
}
{\stylesheet
{\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
{\cs10 \additive\ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\s1\qc\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 Part;}
{\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}
{\s4\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 3;}
{\s5\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 4;}
{\s6\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 5;}
{\s7\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 6;}
{\s8\qr\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext8 rightpar;}
{\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext9 centerpar;}
{\s10\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext10 leftpar;}
{\s11\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equation;}
{\s12\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationNum;}
{\s13\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationAlign;}
{\s14\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationAlignNum;}
{\s15\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationArray;}
{\s16\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationArrayNum;}
{\s17\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 theorem;}
{\s18\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 bitmapCenter;}
{\s20\qc\sb240\sa240\b\f0\fs36 \sbasedon0\snext21 Title;}
{\s21\qc\sa120\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 author;}
{\s22\ql\tqc\tx4536\tqr\tx9072\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext22 footer;}
{\s23\ql\tqc\tx4536\tqr\tx9072\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext23 header;}
{\s30\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 caption;}
{\s31\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 Figure;}
{\s32\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext32 Table;}
{\s33\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext33 Tabular;}
{\s34\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext34 Tabbing;}
{\s35\qj\li1024\ri1024\fi340\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext35 Quote;}
{\s38\ql\widctlpar\f3\fs20 \snext38 verbatim;}
{\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext46 List;}
{\s47\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext47 List 1;}
{\s50\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 latex picture;}
{\s51\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 subfigure;}
{\s61\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext62 bibheading;}
{\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext62 bibitem;}
{\s64\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext64 endnotes;}
{\s65\ql\fi-113\li397\lin397\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext65 footnote text;}
{\s66\qj\fi-170\li454\lin454\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext66 endnote text;}
{\cs62\super \additive\sbasedon10 footnote reference;}
{\cs63\super \additive\sbasedon10 endnote reference;}
{\s67\ql\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext67 acronym;}
{\s70\qc\sa120\b\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext71 abstract title;}
{\s71\qj\li1024\ri1024\fi340\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 abstract;}
{\s80\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 contents_heading;}
{\s81\ql\li425\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb240\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20\b \sbasedon0\snext82 toc 1;}
{\s82\ql\li512\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext83 toc 2;}
{\s83\ql\li1024\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext84 toc 3;}
{\s84\ql\li1536\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext85 toc 4;}
{\s85\ql\li2048\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext86 toc 5;}
{\s86\ql\li2560\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext86 toc 6;}
}
{\info
{\title Original file was cover_letter.tex}
{\doccomm Created using latex2rtf 2.3.18 r1267 (released May 30, 2020) on Wed Oct 28 20:32:00 2020
}
}
{\footer\pard\plain\f0\fs20\qc\chpgn\par}
\paperw12280\paperh15900\margl1084\margr1084\margt1084\margb1084\pgnstart0\widowctrl\qj\ftnbj\f0\aftnnar
{{
\par\pard\qr \par\chdate 
\par\pard\ql \pard\plain\s10\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Dear Editor(s) of Developmental Psychobiology:
\par\pard\qj  I am pleased to submit to you my very first, first author paper draft submission entitled, \ldblquote Introducing an Adolescent Cognitive Maturity Index and Tracking Vulnerability in Emerging Adulthood.\rdblquote  \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 To the authors\rquote  best knowledge, this manuscript details the very first systematic approach for estimating \ldblquote cognitive age\rdblquote  in developing adolescents. We apply well-known open-source statistical methods to a novel problem with a significant social impact beyond the laboratory. Our work demonstrates the under-appreciated importance of neuropsychological task performance for building rigorous models to bridge the yet-outstanding gap between behavioral and cognitive neuroscience,{\cs62\super\chftn}
{\*\footnote\pard \s65\ql\fi-113\li397\lin397\f0\fs20{\cs62\super\chftn} Niv, Y. (2020, October 22). The primacy of behavioral research for understanding the brain. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/y8mxe}
 specifically to tackle the difficult and important challenge of tracking maturation from adolescence to adulthood. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Cognitive skills training has been known to be an effective instrument of youth violence prevention,{\cs62\super\chftn}
{\*\footnote\pard \s65\ql\fi-113\li397\lin397\f0\fs20{\cs62\super\chftn} Lipsey, M. W., Howell, J. C., Kelly, M. R., Chapman, G., & Carver, D. (2010). Improving the effectiveness of juvenile justice programs. Washington DC: Center for Juvenile Justice Reform at Georgetown University.}
 however direct connections between prevention and current working models of adolescent neurocognitive development have remained superficial, despite a decade of research.{\cs62\super\chftn}
{\*\footnote\pard \s65\ql\fi-113\li397\lin397\f0\fs20{\cs62\super\chftn} Johnson, S. B., Blum, R. W., & Giedd, J. N. (2009). Adolescent maturity and the brain: the promise and pitfalls of neuroscience research in adolescent health policy. Journal of Adolescent Health, 45(3), 216-221.}
 Our work provides a detailed quantitative elaboration of age-related change in inhibitory control, risk taking, and emotional processing skills and how the maturation of these skills relates to risk factors in the difficult transition from adolescence into emerging adulthood. We believe the described methodology for estimating a quantitative metric of the elusive concept of maturity will have a substantial impact on the field of adolescent cognitive development and translational research programs in violence and adverse outcome prevention. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 We would like to disclose that an early version of the manuscript has been submitted as a pre-print on PsyArXiv{\cs62\super\chftn}
{\*\footnote\pard \s65\ql\fi-113\li397\lin397\f0\fs20{\cs62\super\chftn} El Damaty, S., Darcey, V., McQuaid, G., Stoianova, M., Fesalbon, M., Mucciarone, V., \u226?\u8364?\u166? VanMeter, J. (2020, October 26). Introducing an Adolescent Cognitive Maturity Index and Tracking Vulnerability in Emerging Adulthood. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/6uwrp}
 but has not been submitted or published at any journal. All data collection and analysis was performed in compliance with regulatory guidelines and requirements for human subjects research.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 I hope you enjoy the contents and insights in this paper as much as we have in producing this scholarly product for your enlightened consumption,\par

\par\pard\qr \pard\plain\s8\qr\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 On behalf of the Adolescent Development Study Team,
\par\par\par Shady El Damaty
\par\pard\qj \par
}}}
